docs/entitlements/quickstart.mdx, before:

---
title: Quickstart
description: Get up and running with entitlements in 5 minutes
---

# Quickstart

This guide will walk you through setting up `@courierkit/entitlements` to check if users can perform actions based on their subscription plan.

## Installation

<CodeGroup>
```bash npm
npm install @courierkit/entitlements
```

```bash yarn
yarn add @courierkit/entitlements
```
</CodeGroup>

## Step 1: Define Your Adapter

The adapter connects the entitlements engine to your data. You need to implement two methods:

```typescript
import { createEntitlements, windows, type Adapter } from '@courierkit/entitlements';

const adapter: Adapter = {
  // Return entitlements for an actor (user, team, org, etc.)
  async getEntitlements(actorId: string) {
    // This is where you query your database, Stripe, etc.
    const user = await db.users.findById(actorId);
    const plan = await db.plans.findById(user.planId);

    // Map your data model to the entitlement shape
    return {
      'api-calls': {
        limit: plan.apiCallsLimit,  // e.g., 1000 or null for unlimited
        window: windows.monthly,     // When the limit resets
      },
      'exports': {
        limit: plan.exportsPerDay,
        window: windows.daily,
      },
      'team-members': {
        limit: plan.maxTeamMembers,
        window: null,  // Lifetime limit (doesn't reset)
      },
    };
  },

  // Return usage count for an action within a time interval
  async getUsage(actorId: string, action: string, interval) {
    return db.usage.count({
      actorId,
      action,
      timestamp: {
        gte: interval.start,
        lt: interval.end,
      },
    });
  },
};
```

## Step 2: Create the Engine

```typescript
const entitlements = createEntitlements({ adapter });
```

## Step 3: Check Permissions

### Basic Check

```typescript
const decision = await entitlements.check({
  actorId: 'user-123',
  action: 'api-calls',
});

if (decision.outcome.allowed) {
  // Perform the action
  await performApiCall();

  // Fulfill obligations (increment usage counter)
  for (const obligation of decision.obligations) {
    if (obligation.type === 'consume') {
      await db.usage.create({
        actorId: 'user-123',
        action: 'api-calls',
        amount: obligation.params.amount,
        timestamp: new Date(),
      });
    }
  }
} else {
  // Access denied - check reasons
  console.log(decision.reasons[0].explanation);
  // "Limit exceeded (1000/1000 used)"
}
```

### Check Multiple Actions

```typescript
const caps = await entitlements.capabilities({
  actorId: 'user-123',
  actions: ['api-calls', 'exports', 'bulk-import'],
});

// caps.summary.available: ['api-calls']
// caps.summary.exhausted: ['exports']
// caps.summary.unavailable: ['bulk-import']

// Show UI based on capabilities
if (caps.actions['exports'].status === 'exhausted') {
  showUpgradePrompt(caps.actions['exports'].availableAt);
}
```

### Show Usage Dashboard

```typescript
const dash = await entitlements.dashboard({
  actorId: 'user-123',
});

// Render quota cards
for (const [action, quota] of Object.entries(dash.quotas)) {
  console.log(`${quota.name}: ${quota.used}/${quota.limit ?? '∞'}`);
  if (quota.resetsAt) {
    console.log(`  Resets: ${quota.resetsAt.toLocaleDateString()}`);
  }
}
```

## Common Patterns

### Checking Before an Action

```typescript
async function exportData(userId: string, data: any) {
  const decision = await entitlements.check({
    actorId: userId,
    action: 'exports',
  });

  if (!decision.outcome.allowed) {
    throw new QuotaExceededError(decision.reasons[0].explanation);
  }

  // Do the export
  const result = await performExport(data);

  // Record usage after success
  await recordUsage(userId, 'exports', 1);

  return result;
}
```

### Consuming Multiple Units

```typescript
// Bulk operations that consume more than 1 unit
const decision = await entitlements.check({
  actorId: 'user-123',
  action: 'api-calls',
  consume: 100,  // Batch of 100 API calls
});
```

### When Will It Be Available?

```typescript
const availability = await entitlements.availableAt({
  actorId: 'user-123',
  action: 'exports',
});

switch (availability.status) {
  case 'now':
    // Can export right now
    break;
  case 'at':
    // Will be available at availability.at
    showCountdown(availability.at);
    break;
  case 'never':
    // Lifetime limit reached or not in plan
    showUpgradePrompt();
    break;
}
```

## Time Windows

The library includes presets for common reset patterns:

```typescript
import { windows } from '@courierkit/entitlements';

// Calendar-based (reset at fixed points)
windows.hourly   // Reset at the start of each hour
windows.daily    // Reset at midnight UTC
windows.weekly   // Reset on Monday at midnight
windows.monthly  // Reset on the 1st at midnight
windows.yearly   // Reset on Jan 1st

// Rolling windows (sliding time window)
windows.rolling(24, 'hours')  // Last 24 hours
windows.rolling(7, 'days')    // Last 7 days
windows.rolling(4, 'weeks')   // Last 4 weeks

// No reset
windows.lifetime  // Never resets
null              // Unlimited (no tracking needed)
```

## Next Steps

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Mental Model" icon="brain" href="/entitlements/mental-model">
    Understand the core concepts: facts, rules, obligations, and decisions.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Time Windows" icon="clock" href="/entitlements/concepts/time-windows">
    Learn about calendar vs sliding windows and when to use each.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

Commit message:

Add core package, availability adapter, and data model docs

docs/entitlements/quickstart.mdx, after:

---
title: Quickstart
description: Get up and running with entitlements in 5 minutes
---

# Quickstart

This guide will walk you through setting up `@courierkit/entitlements` to check if users can perform actions based on their subscription plan.

## Installation

<CodeGroup>
```bash npm
npm install @courierkit/entitlements
```

```bash yarn
yarn add @courierkit/entitlements
```
</CodeGroup>

## Step 1: Define Your Adapter

The adapter connects the entitlements engine to your data. You need to implement two methods:

```typescript
import { createEntitlements, windows, type Adapter } from '@courierkit/entitlements';

const adapter: Adapter = {
  // Return entitlements for an actor (user, team, org, etc.)
  async getEntitlements(actorId: string) {
    // This is where you query your database, Stripe, etc.
    const user = await db.users.findById(actorId);
    const plan = await db.plans.findById(user.planId);

    // Map your data model to the entitlement shape
    return {
      'api-calls': {
        limit: plan.apiCallsLimit,  // e.g., 1000 or null for unlimited
        window: windows.monthly,     // When the limit resets
      },
      'exports': {
        limit: plan.exportsPerDay,
        window: windows.daily,
      },
      'team-members': {
        limit: plan.maxTeamMembers,
        window: null,  // Lifetime limit (doesn't reset)
      },
    };
  },

  // Return usage count for an action within a time interval
  async getUsage(actorId: string, action: string, interval) {
    return db.usage.count({
      actorId,
      action,
      timestamp: {
        gte: interval.start,
        lt: interval.end,
      },
    });
  },
};
```

## Step 2: Create the Engine

```typescript
const entitlements = createEntitlements({ adapter });
```

## Step 3: Check Permissions

### Basic Check

```typescript
const decision = await entitlements.check({
  actorId: 'user-123',
  action: 'api-calls',
});

if (decision.outcome.allowed) {
  // Perform the action
  await performApiCall();

  // Fulfill obligations (increment usage counter)
  for (const obligation of decision.obligations) {
    if (obligation.type === 'consume') {
      await db.usage.create({
        actorId: 'user-123',
        action: 'api-calls',
        amount: obligation.params.amount,
        timestamp: new Date(),
      });
    }
  }
} else {
  // Access denied - check reasons
  console.log(decision.reasons[0].explanation);
  // "Limit exceeded (1000/1000 used)"
}
```

### Check Multiple Actions

```typescript
const caps = await entitlements.capabilities({
  actorId: 'user-123',
  actions: ['api-calls', 'exports', 'bulk-import'],
});

// caps.summary.available: ['api-calls']
// caps.summary.exhausted: ['exports']
// caps.summary.unavailable: ['bulk-import']

// Show UI based on capabilities
if (caps.actions['exports'].status === 'exhausted') {
  showUpgradePrompt(caps.actions['exports'].availableAt);
}
```

### Show Usage Dashboard

```typescript
const dash = await entitlements.dashboard({
  actorId: 'user-123',
});

// Render quota cards
for (const [action, quota] of Object.entries(dash.quotas)) {
  console.log(`${quota.name}: ${quota.used}/${quota.limit ?? '∞'}`);
  if (quota.resetsAt) {
    console.log(`  Resets: ${quota.resetsAt.toLocaleDateString()}`);
  }
}
```

## Common Patterns

### Checking Before an Action

```typescript
async function exportData(userId: string, data: any) {
  const decision = await entitlements.check({
    actorId: userId,
    action: 'exports',
  });

  if (!decision.outcome.allowed) {
    throw new QuotaExceededError(decision.reasons[0].explanation);
  }

  // Do the export
  const result = await performExport(data);

  // Record usage after success
  await recordUsage(userId, 'exports', 1);

  return result;
}
```

### Consuming Multiple Units

```typescript
// Bulk operations that consume more than 1 unit
const decision = await entitlements.check({
  actorId: 'user-123',
  action: 'api-calls',
  consume: 100,  // Batch of 100 API calls
});
```

### When Will It Be Available?

```typescript
const availability = await entitlements.availableAt({
  actorId: 'user-123',
  action: 'exports',
});

switch (availability.status) {
  case 'now':
    // Can export right now
    break;
  case 'at':
    // Will be available at availability.at
    showCountdown(availability.at);
    break;
  case 'never':
    // Lifetime limit reached or not in plan
    showUpgradePrompt();
    break;
}
```

## Time Windows

The library includes presets for common reset patterns:

```typescript
import { windows } from '@courierkit/entitlements';

// Calendar-based (reset at fixed points)
windows.hourly   // Reset at the start of each hour
windows.daily    // Reset at midnight UTC
windows.weekly   // Reset on Monday at midnight
windows.monthly  // Reset on the 1st at midnight
windows.yearly   // Reset on Jan 1st

// Rolling windows (sliding time window)
windows.rolling(24, 'hours')  // Last 24 hours
windows.rolling(7, 'days')    // Last 7 days
windows.rolling(4, 'weeks')   // Last 4 weeks

// No reset
windows.lifetime  // Never resets
null              // Unlimited (no tracking needed)
```

## Database Setup (Optional but Recommended)

The engine is stateless, so your database (or billing system) is the source of truth.

- See the [Data Model](/entitlements/concepts/data-model) guide for a concrete schema and query patterns.

## Next Steps

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Mental Model" icon="brain" href="/entitlements/mental-model">
    Understand the core concepts: facts, rules, obligations, and decisions.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Time Windows" icon="clock" href="/entitlements/concepts/time-windows">
    Learn about calendar vs sliding windows and when to use each.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>
