docs/availability/quickstart.mdx, before:

---
title: Quickstart
description: Get up and running with slot generation in 5 minutes
---

# Quickstart

This guide walks through building availability for a realistic booking scenario: a therapy practice where clients can book 50-minute sessions with therapists who have different schedules.

## Step 1: Install the Package

<CodeGroup>
```bash npm
npm install @courierkit/availability
```

```bash yarn
yarn add @courierkit/availability
```
</CodeGroup>

## Step 2: Define a Schedule

A schedule defines when a host (therapist, room, equipment) is available. Schedules consist of recurring rules and optional overrides for specific dates.

```typescript
import type { HostSchedules } from '@courierkit/availability';

const drJohnson: HostSchedules = {
  hostId: 'therapist-johnson',
  schedules: {
    default: {
      id: 'default',
      rules: [
        {
          // Monday, Wednesday, Friday: 9am - 5pm
          days: ['monday', 'wednesday', 'friday'],
          startTime: '09:00',
          endTime: '17:00',
          timezone: 'America/Chicago',
        },
        {
          // Tuesday, Thursday: 12pm - 8pm (evening hours)
          days: ['tuesday', 'thursday'],
          startTime: '12:00',
          endTime: '20:00',
          timezone: 'America/Chicago',
        },
      ],
      overrides: [
        // Taking Christmas week off
        { date: '2024-12-23', available: false },
        { date: '2024-12-24', available: false },
        { date: '2024-12-25', available: false },
        { date: '2024-12-26', available: false },
        { date: '2024-12-27', available: false },
        // Working a special Saturday
        { date: '2024-01-20', available: true, startTime: '10:00', endTime: '14:00' },
      ],
    },
  },
};
```

## Step 3: Define an Event Type

Event types describe what's being booked and carry scheduling constraints:

```typescript
import type { EventType } from '@courierkit/availability';

const therapySession: EventType = {
  id: 'therapy-session',
  length: 50 * 60 * 1000, // 50 minutes

  // 10 minutes between sessions for notes and transition
  bufferAfter: 10 * 60 * 1000,

  // Snap to hourly slots (session at :00, buffer until :00)
  slotInterval: 60 * 60 * 1000,

  // Require 24 hours notice for booking
  minimumNotice: 24 * 60 * 60 * 1000,

  // Only show availability 2 weeks out
  maximumLeadTime: 14 * 24 * 60 * 60 * 1000,

  // Limit to 6 sessions per day per therapist
  maxPerDay: 6,
};
```

## Step 4: Add Existing Bookings

Include any existing appointments that should block time:

```typescript
import type { Booking } from '@courierkit/availability';

const existingBookings: Booking[] = [
  {
    hostId: 'therapist-johnson',
    start: new Date('2024-01-15T15:00:00Z'), // 9am Chicago
    end: new Date('2024-01-15T15:50:00Z'),
    eventTypeId: 'therapy-session',
  },
  {
    hostId: 'therapist-johnson',
    start: new Date('2024-01-15T17:00:00Z'), // 11am Chicago
    end: new Date('2024-01-15T17:50:00Z'),
    eventTypeId: 'therapy-session',
  },
];
```

## Step 5: Get Available Slots

Now compute what's available:

```typescript
import { getAvailableSlots } from '@courierkit/availability';

const slots = getAvailableSlots({
  eventType: therapySession,
  hosts: [drJohnson],
  bookings: existingBookings,
  range: {
    start: new Date('2024-01-15T00:00:00Z'),
    end: new Date('2024-01-22T00:00:00Z'),
  },
});

// slots is an array of available time slots:
// [
//   { hostId: 'therapist-johnson', start: 2024-01-15T16:00:00Z, end: 2024-01-15T16:50:00Z },
//   { hostId: 'therapist-johnson', start: 2024-01-15T18:00:00Z, end: 2024-01-15T18:50:00Z },
//   ...
// ]
```

## Step 6: Display to Users

The slots are returned in UTC. Convert to the user's timezone for display:

```typescript
function formatSlotForUser(slot: Slot, userTimezone: string): string {
  const formatter = new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-US', {
    timeZone: userTimezone,
    weekday: 'short',
    month: 'short',
    day: 'numeric',
    hour: 'numeric',
    minute: '2-digit',
  });

  return formatter.format(slot.start);
}

// Display available slots
slots.forEach(slot => {
  console.log(formatSlotForUser(slot, 'America/New_York'));
});

// Output:
// Mon, Jan 15, 11:00 AM
// Mon, Jan 15, 1:00 PM
// ...
```

## Complete Example

Here's the full working code:

```typescript
import {
  getAvailableSlots,
  type EventType,
  type HostSchedules,
  type Booking,
  type Slot,
} from '@courierkit/availability';

// 1. Define the therapist's schedule
const drJohnson: HostSchedules = {
  hostId: 'therapist-johnson',
  schedules: {
    default: {
      id: 'default',
      rules: [
        {
          days: ['monday', 'wednesday', 'friday'],
          startTime: '09:00',
          endTime: '17:00',
          timezone: 'America/Chicago',
        },
        {
          days: ['tuesday', 'thursday'],
          startTime: '12:00',
          endTime: '20:00',
          timezone: 'America/Chicago',
        },
      ],
    },
  },
};

// 2. Define the session type
const therapySession: EventType = {
  id: 'therapy-session',
  length: 50 * 60 * 1000,
  bufferAfter: 10 * 60 * 1000,
  slotInterval: 60 * 60 * 1000,
  minimumNotice: 24 * 60 * 60 * 1000,
  maxPerDay: 6,
};

// 3. Fetch existing bookings from your database
const existingBookings: Booking[] = [
  {
    hostId: 'therapist-johnson',
    start: new Date('2024-01-15T15:00:00Z'),
    end: new Date('2024-01-15T15:50:00Z'),
    eventTypeId: 'therapy-session',
  },
];

// 4. Compute available slots
const availableSlots = getAvailableSlots({
  eventType: therapySession,
  hosts: [drJohnson],
  bookings: existingBookings,
  range: {
    start: new Date('2024-01-15T00:00:00Z'),
    end: new Date('2024-01-22T00:00:00Z'),
  },
});

console.log(`Found ${availableSlots.length} available slots`);
```

## Next Steps

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Core Concepts" icon="book" href="/concepts/schedules">
    Understand schedules, event types, and how the engine thinks about time.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Healthcare Example" icon="stethoscope" href="/examples/healthcare-clinic">
    See a complete healthcare booking implementation with multiple providers.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Google Calendar" icon="calendar" href="/examples/google-calendar-integration">
    Integrate with Google Calendar to block external events.
  </Card>
  <Card title="API Reference" icon="code" href="/api-reference/get-available-slots">
    Full documentation of all functions and types.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

Commit message:

Add core package, availability adapter, and data model docs

docs/availability/quickstart.mdx, after:

---
title: Quickstart
description: Get up and running with slot generation in 5 minutes
---

# Quickstart

This guide walks through building availability for a realistic booking scenario: a therapy practice where clients can book 50-minute sessions with therapists who have different schedules.

## Step 1: Install the Package

<CodeGroup>
```bash npm
npm install @courierkit/availability
```

```bash yarn
yarn add @courierkit/availability
```
</CodeGroup>

## Step 2: Define a Schedule

A schedule defines when a host (therapist, room, equipment) is available. Schedules consist of recurring rules and optional overrides for specific dates.

```typescript
import type { HostSchedules } from '@courierkit/availability';

const drJohnson: HostSchedules = {
  hostId: 'therapist-johnson',
  schedules: {
    default: {
      id: 'default',
      rules: [
        {
          // Monday, Wednesday, Friday: 9am - 5pm
          days: ['monday', 'wednesday', 'friday'],
          startTime: '09:00',
          endTime: '17:00',
          timezone: 'America/Chicago',
        },
        {
          // Tuesday, Thursday: 12pm - 8pm (evening hours)
          days: ['tuesday', 'thursday'],
          startTime: '12:00',
          endTime: '20:00',
          timezone: 'America/Chicago',
        },
      ],
      overrides: [
        // Taking Christmas week off
        { date: '2024-12-23', available: false },
        { date: '2024-12-24', available: false },
        { date: '2024-12-25', available: false },
        { date: '2024-12-26', available: false },
        { date: '2024-12-27', available: false },
        // Working a special Saturday
        { date: '2024-01-20', available: true, startTime: '10:00', endTime: '14:00' },
      ],
    },
  },
};
```

## Step 3: Define an Event Type

Event types describe what's being booked and carry scheduling constraints:

```typescript
import type { EventType } from '@courierkit/availability';

const therapySession: EventType = {
  id: 'therapy-session',
  length: 50 * 60 * 1000, // 50 minutes

  // 10 minutes between sessions for notes and transition
  bufferAfter: 10 * 60 * 1000,

  // Snap to hourly slots (session at :00, buffer until :00)
  slotInterval: 60 * 60 * 1000,

  // Require 24 hours notice for booking
  minimumNotice: 24 * 60 * 60 * 1000,

  // Only show availability 2 weeks out
  maximumLeadTime: 14 * 24 * 60 * 60 * 1000,

  // Limit to 6 sessions per day per therapist
  maxPerDay: 6,
};
```

## Step 4: Add Existing Bookings

Include any existing appointments that should block time:

```typescript
import type { Booking } from '@courierkit/availability';

const existingBookings: Booking[] = [
  {
    hostId: 'therapist-johnson',
    start: new Date('2024-01-15T15:00:00Z'), // 9am Chicago
    end: new Date('2024-01-15T15:50:00Z'),
    eventTypeId: 'therapy-session',
  },
  {
    hostId: 'therapist-johnson',
    start: new Date('2024-01-15T17:00:00Z'), // 11am Chicago
    end: new Date('2024-01-15T17:50:00Z'),
    eventTypeId: 'therapy-session',
  },
];
```

## Step 5: Get Available Slots

Now compute what's available:

```typescript
import { getAvailableSlots } from '@courierkit/availability';

const slots = getAvailableSlots({
  eventType: therapySession,
  hosts: [drJohnson],
  bookings: existingBookings,
  range: {
    start: new Date('2024-01-15T00:00:00Z'),
    end: new Date('2024-01-22T00:00:00Z'),
  },
});

// slots is an array of available time slots:
// [
//   { hostId: 'therapist-johnson', start: 2024-01-15T16:00:00Z, end: 2024-01-15T16:50:00Z },
//   { hostId: 'therapist-johnson', start: 2024-01-15T18:00:00Z, end: 2024-01-15T18:50:00Z },
//   ...
// ]
```

## Step 6: Display to Users

The slots are returned in UTC. Convert to the user's timezone for display:

```typescript
function formatSlotForUser(slot: Slot, userTimezone: string): string {
  const formatter = new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-US', {
    timeZone: userTimezone,
    weekday: 'short',
    month: 'short',
    day: 'numeric',
    hour: 'numeric',
    minute: '2-digit',
  });

  return formatter.format(slot.start);
}

// Display available slots
slots.forEach(slot => {
  console.log(formatSlotForUser(slot, 'America/New_York'));
});

// Output:
// Mon, Jan 15, 11:00 AM
// Mon, Jan 15, 1:00 PM
// ...
```

## Complete Example

Here's the full working code:

```typescript
import {
  getAvailableSlots,
  type EventType,
  type HostSchedules,
  type Booking,
  type Slot,
} from '@courierkit/availability';

// 1. Define the therapist's schedule
const drJohnson: HostSchedules = {
  hostId: 'therapist-johnson',
  schedules: {
    default: {
      id: 'default',
      rules: [
        {
          days: ['monday', 'wednesday', 'friday'],
          startTime: '09:00',
          endTime: '17:00',
          timezone: 'America/Chicago',
        },
        {
          days: ['tuesday', 'thursday'],
          startTime: '12:00',
          endTime: '20:00',
          timezone: 'America/Chicago',
        },
      ],
    },
  },
};

// 2. Define the session type
const therapySession: EventType = {
  id: 'therapy-session',
  length: 50 * 60 * 1000,
  bufferAfter: 10 * 60 * 1000,
  slotInterval: 60 * 60 * 1000,
  minimumNotice: 24 * 60 * 60 * 1000,
  maxPerDay: 6,
};

// 3. Fetch existing bookings from your database
const existingBookings: Booking[] = [
  {
    hostId: 'therapist-johnson',
    start: new Date('2024-01-15T15:00:00Z'),
    end: new Date('2024-01-15T15:50:00Z'),
    eventTypeId: 'therapy-session',
  },
];

// 4. Compute available slots
const availableSlots = getAvailableSlots({
  eventType: therapySession,
  hosts: [drJohnson],
  bookings: existingBookings,
  range: {
    start: new Date('2024-01-15T00:00:00Z'),
    end: new Date('2024-01-22T00:00:00Z'),
  },
});

console.log(`Found ${availableSlots.length} available slots`);
```

## Database Setup (Optional but Recommended)

The engine is stateless, so you'll store schedules, event types, bookings, and blocks in your own database.

- See the [Data Model](/availability/concepts/data-model) guide for a concrete schema and query patterns.
- If you don't want to assemble inputs manually, use [createAvailability](/availability/api-reference/create-availability) to load data via an adapter.

## Next Steps

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Core Concepts" icon="book" href="/concepts/schedules">
    Understand schedules, event types, and how the engine thinks about time.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Healthcare Example" icon="stethoscope" href="/examples/healthcare-clinic">
    See a complete healthcare booking implementation with multiple providers.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Google Calendar" icon="calendar" href="/examples/google-calendar-integration">
    Integrate with Google Calendar to block external events.
  </Card>
  <Card title="API Reference" icon="code" href="/api-reference/get-available-slots">
    Full documentation of all functions and types.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>
